---
title: "JCM v1.1: a differentiable, intermediate-complexity atmospheric model"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2026-07-18-jcm
excerpt: 'JCM is a differentiable atmospheric model that is built in Python with the JAX numerical library and is released under a free and open-source software (FOSS) license.'
date: 2026-07-18
venue: 'Geoscientific Model Development'
paperurl: 'https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/19/6451/2026/gmd-19-6451-2026.pdf'
bibtexurl: 'https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/19/6451/2026/gmd-19-6451-2026.bib'
citation: 'Davenport, E. H. and Madan, J. V. and Gjini, R. and Brzenski, J. and Crawford, B. and Ho, N. and Hsu, T.-Y. and Liang, Y. and Liu, Z. and Manivannan, V. and Pham, E. and Vutukuru, R. and Williams, A. I. L. and Yang, Z. and Yu, R. and Lutsko, N. J. and Hoyer, S. and Watson-Parris, D.'
---
# Abstract:
In this paper we present version 1.1 of the JAX Circulation Model (JCM). JCM is a differentiable atmospheric model that is built in Python with the JAX numerical library and is released under a free and open-source software (FOSS) license. Earth system modeling is rapidly evolving, particularly through hybrid approaches that combine known dynamics with data-driven components. However, the training and validation of hybrid methods in traditional models remain difficult due to the absence of gradients and the complexity of legacy code. Differentiable models written in modern frameworks offer a path forward. JCM couples physics parameterizations to the Dinosaur dynamical core through a flexible interface that makes substitution of other schemes easy. The default parameterization scheme uses the SPEEDY (Simplified Parameterizations, primitivE-Equation DYnamics) intermediate-complexity physics scheme. This modularity supports benchmarking across physical and machine-learned schemes, with direct access to gradients for sensitivity analysis, calibration, and online learning. We show validation of JCM against the original Fortran SPEEDY code at T31 resolution. We also highlight JCM's differentiability and efficiency and outline plans for extending the framework to a differentiable Earth system model. JCM provides a lightweight yet expressive platform for accelerating research in climate modeling.

# Contribution:
For this project, I contributed by providing a characterization of the performance of the model on various different types of hardware. This involved setting up several different VMs in Google Cloud Compute and executing the model several times while collecting various runtime statistics. The result of this work is summarized in section 5 of the paper. I also implemented the logging system for the model. 